import Article from "../../components/Article";

<Article
  title="Fundamentals"
  subtitle="What you need to know about Hacss">

### CSS-in-HTML
All professional web developers are familiar with inline styles. Most developers
restrict their use to trivial prototyping exercises due to
[functional limitations](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/131653/inline-style-to-act-as-hover-in-css)
or belief in a separation of concerns between markup and presentation styles. On
the other hand, newer architectures such as 
[atomic CSS](https://css-tricks.com/lets-define-exactly-atomic-css/) and
[CSS-in-JS](https://medium.com/dailyjs/what-is-actually-css-in-js-f2f529a2757)
demonstrate that some developers prefer _colocation_ of markup and related style
rules.

Like these approaches, Hacss facilitates the colocation of markup and styles. It
combines the strongest features of atomic CSS and CSS-in-JS while minimizing the
downsides of each approach.

Hacss works by embedding CSS syntax within ordinary HTML classes. While the
class names are meaningless to the browser, Hacss analyzes them at build time
and generates a style sheet that contains the corresponding "actual" CSS. For
example, the class name `color:red;` results in the style sheet
`.color\:red\;{color:red;}`

### Advantages

#### Versus inline styles

Inline styles would be a good option if they were more capable. CSS-in-HTML
delivers a similar development experience with the additional capabilities that
typically require a style sheet or JavaScript: pseudo-selectors, media queries,
variables, and conditional style rules.

#### Versus CSS-in-JS

CSS-in-HTML may offer better performance in that it has no JavaScript runtime
dependency. Instead, the work of generating a style sheet happens once at build
time.

It is also a more composable solution in that it can be easily used in other
contexts, e.g. compile-to-JS languages or static web sites.

#### Versus atomic CSS

With a familiar syntax that translates directly to CSS, the CSS-in-HTML approach
provides significant advantages over atomic CSS.

First, the learning curve is greatly reduced because, unlike atomic CSS
frameworks, there is no system of utility class names to learn. Instead, the
class names mostly consist of the underlying CSS that one would write anyway.

Perhaps more importantly, CSS-in-HTML is flexible in a way that no set of
predefined classes can match. Hacss makes it possible to use advanced selectors
where atomic CSS frameworks are typically limited to basic pseudo-classes like
`:hover` and `:focus`. It also allows variables to be interpolated into style
rules, which can address "edge-case" scenarios, e.g. `left:calc(50%+#{$spacing4});`

### Constraints

While CSS-in-HTML introduces fewer constraints than other approaches, some basic
rules apply.

#### Whitespace

Whitespace cannot be used within a style rule because it is used to delimit HTML
classes. The browser would simply not apply the intended style rule if it were
allowed to contain spaces.

##### What to do instead

When spaces are required (which is not very often), double underscores may be
used in declaration values, e.g. `box-shadow:0__0__0__1px__black;`

#### Dynamic class names

Style rules cannot be constructed dynamically using string concatenation,
template literals, or otherwise. They must appear in the code as string literals
in order to be detected and processed correctly.

##### What to do instead

Hacss provides its own syntax for variables and basic interpolation, and
selectors can be used to apply styles conditionally. When these options are
insufficient (such as when styling the width of an element as calculated in
JavaScript), a native inline style is a reasonable solution and usually does not
introduce any unintended side effects despite its high specificity.

</Article>
